---
chapter: 1
title: "Getting Set Up"
layout: default

---

### Welcome, welcome, welcome! 

Unfortunately, the first thing is always first, and that thing is housekeeping and installations. 

"Installing shit" is actually one of the most important and, at times, frustrating aspects of being a developer. You might think that programmers spend most of their time, you know, *programming*. That's not true. 

One of the things programmers do instead of programming is installing getting other people's code, so they can just run that instead of programming something themselves. This is the best kind of lazy. Reinventing the wheel is almost always a waste of time. And you'll find that the community of open-source developers is incredible; nice programmers out there spend *lots of time* writing code so you don't have to. 

But, you do have to download and install it. So let's get to it. 

(Note: I'm going to be writing this guide for *OSX only* for my own sanity. Most things should work on Linux too if you're cool enough to be on Linux. If you're on Windows, just be aware that your life will be hard and I'm not ready to help you yet. Sorry!)

## Installation Station!

Open Terminal (search "Terminal" in spotlight if you can't find it). 

> If you want to make your terminal super cool, download the [Solarized Dark](http://ethanschoonover.com/solarized/files/solarized.zip) color theme. Open the "osx-terminal.app-colors-solarized" folder and double-click the Dark one. Set it as your default in Terminal's Preferences. 
> I also recommend using the "Monaco" font. Ahh!

### Homebrew
First, we'll install Homebrew, usually referred to simply as "brew". Brew is what's called a "package manager" for OSX. (Translation: it makes it easy to install all that great open sources stuff I've been talking about.) 

In Terminal, enter the following code, press Enter, and follow the instructions: 

```
ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"
```

(One of those instructions was to run the following code: `echo ` <<<TODO: ASK CLARKE WHAT THIS WAS>>>>)

### Git
Git is "Version Control" for your code. It lets you work on code with other people, but also helps you work on code with yourself. Git is one of the most ubiquitously used tools in software today. In fact, it's how almost all open source code is shared (usually on a site called GitHub). 

In Terminal: 
```
brew install git
```

### Node
Node (aka Node.js) lets you run JavaScript anywhere, instead of just in a browser. When people refer to "Node", they're talking about JavaScript that can run "on the server", or in your terminal. 
    
In Terminal: 
```
brew install node
```

Node comes with `npm`, aka Node Package Manager. It's like Brew, but for Node libraries. (Don't worry if that's confusing.)

### CoffeeScript
This guide is taught primarily in CoffeeScript, a little language that compiles to JavaScript. I find that writing Coffee is a lot more fun and productive than writing JavaScript, and I want you to have fun, so I'm teaching in Coffee. But it's very important that you understand JavaScript, since that's what you're *really* writing. 

In Terminal: 
```
npm install --global coffee-script coffeelint
```

Note that `--global` is the same thing as `-g`. This kind of shortening is a common pattern in programs with a Command Line Interfaces (CLI). You'll be interfacing with a lot of CLI's (blech, I know). 

(I snuck the `coffeelint` in there for nefarious puproses of do-gooding...)

### Sublime Text 3

(aka "Sublime Text" aka "Sublime")

Sublime is the most popular "text editor" for programmers, especially beginners. [Install it here](http://www.sublimetext.com/3) by clicking the annoyingly small "OS X" link. Don't click the "Download" link at the top, which takes you to an older version of ST. 

Note that unlike almost all other technologies widely used by developers, ST is *not* Free Open Source Software (FOSS). It supposedly costs like $80. But, it has an unlimited free trial. Everyone is on that unlimited free trial. It's not a problem. Still, this makes Sublime a little less cool than the new kid on the block, Atom (see below). 

**Recommended Packages**: There are also some packages I recommend installing on Sublime. First, Sublime's very own package manager, called Package Control, is [installable from here](https://sublime.wbond.net/installation) (follow the instructions). 

Once it's installed, you can press "cmd+shift+p", type "Install", press Enter, wait a second or two, then type the name of a package you want. Here are some that I strongly recommend: 

- SidebarEnhancements
- Emmett
- Better CoffeeScript
- SublimeLinter
- SublimeLinter-coffeelint (this requires that you ran `npm install -g coffeelint` earlier; if not, do so now)

I also recommend running this command: 

```sh
ln -s "/Applications/Sublime Text.app/Contents/SharedSupport/bin/subl" /usr/local/bin/subl
```

which will let you open Sublime from the command line with `subl`.  

**A note on Text Editors:** When people say "text editor", they really mean "code editor". They're different from Document Editors like Microsoft Word, because the file you edit in a text editor is *just text*. You can't do special stuff to it, like make it bold or big or turn it upside-down. And code is *just text*. You therefore can't edit in a Document Editor. 

But, editors like Sublime Text come with lots of terrific functionality just for editing code. One of the most obvious is called syntax highlighting: when some parts of your code are red and some are green or yellow or whatever. Syntax highlighting helps you write code. But the code itself isn't turning red or yellor or whatever, it's just text - the editor is just presenting it that way. Sublime also has lots of other great features, which you should google around for when you feel like it =)

**A note on alternatives:** Sublime is not the only editor out there. Vim and Emacs are what the old-school pros use. You use them from within the terminal (usually). You cannot use a mouse. They are hard to learn. They can turn you into a supergod. 

A new project from Github called [Atom](https://atom.io) is an open-source, javascript-based take-off of Sublime. I was *this close* to recommending it instead of Sublime. In fact, maybe I should have. It's even built with React.js, one of this guide's core technologies! That's how you really know it's the future. But at time of writing, it still had a few too many rough edges. 



