---
chapter: 3
title: "Hello, Fancy Static Site"
layout: default

---


```sh
npm install -g gulp
```

```sh
npm init
```

(the defaults, aka leaving most things blank, are probably fine, though I'd recommend `js/app.js` for "entrypoint")

Let's create the most basic of html pages. In fact, so basic it's not even html. But we'll call the file `index.html` anyway: 

```html
Hello, World!
```

Now we need to serve that somehow. We *could* just open that file in Chrome. But we're going to be fancier than that. In fact, we're going to create a teeny, tiny static server. 

We'll need some software in our package first: 

```sh
npm install --save-dev gulp ecstatic coffee-script
```

Note that these download javascript packages (a bunch of files, really) to a new folder inside of `firstproject` called `node_modules`. It *also* added some stuff to that new `package.json` file. 

(If you're following along with the example github, you'll notice that the changes to the package.json are visible here, but... no additions to `node_modules`! That's because `node_modules` is in my `.gitignore`. Which means, well, `git`, y'know, "ignores" it. Since none of the packages appear in source control, it's vital to always pass `--save` or `--save-dev` to `npm install` so that the names of hte packages are recorded in your `package.json`.) 

Alright, let's put those server-serving files to good use. We'll use `gulp` to do the serving, as well as a bunch of other useful stuff later. 

Now, we make a `gulpfile.coffee` to tell it what we want it to do: 

```coffee
gulp = require "gulp"
ecstatic = require "ecstatic"
http = require "http"

gulp.task "serve", ->
  http.createServer(
    ecstatic
      root: __dirname
  ).listen(8080)

```

(Normally, I try to explain what you're looking at; this is boring and irrelevant to future stuff so... just copy, paste, and forget here =)). We can tell gulp to run that new `task` called `"serve"` by running:

```sh
gulp serve
```

In Chrome, go to `http://localhost:8080`. 

You should see a *beautiful* webpage (err, plain text "hello world", anyway). Yeah, not so exciting. We can do better. 

Now, making beautiful web pages is really hard. HTML and CSS are the languages of the web. And they're pretty lame. Positioning things on a webpage using CSS is, like, the hardest thing ever. 

Until. Until! Until [Bootstrap](http://getbootstrap.com) (formerly Twitter Bootstrap). Bootstrap is a CSS and JavaScript library that lets you use pre-made classes rather than making all the hard styles yourself. Bootstrap is so useful it's rocketed to be the single most popular repository on github. There are alternatives that are also good - [Foundation](http://foundation.zurb.com/) is the most well-known - but Bootstrap has won the beauty contest and now almost all web designers/developers are familiar with it. 

So, we'll be using bootstrap:

```sh
npm install --save bootstrap
```

This... does nothing. We have to put something into that `index.html` (y'know, some real html). We'll pull the most basic Bootstrap html from [Bootstrap's Getting Started page](http://getbootstrap.com/getting-started/#template). Put this in your `index.html`, replacing the old Hello World: 

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
    <title>Bootstrap 101 Template</title>

    <!-- Bootstrap -->
    <link href="css/bootstrap.min.css" rel="stylesheet">

    <!-- HTML5 Shim and Respond.js IE8 support of HTML5 elements and media queries -->
    <!-- WARNING: Respond.js doesn't work if you view the page via file:// -->
    <!--[if lt IE 9]>
      <script src="https://oss.maxcdn.com/html5shiv/3.7.2/html5shiv.min.js"></script>
      <script src="https://oss.maxcdn.com/respond/1.4.2/respond.min.js"></script>
    <![endif]-->
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Hello, world!</h1>

    <!-- jQuery (necessary for Bootstrap's JavaScript plugins) -->
    <script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.11.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
    <!-- Include all compiled plugins (below), or include individual files as needed -->
    <script src="js/bootstrap.min.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

The most important part of Bootstrap is the CSS, so we need to include that! Up near the top of `index.html`, see that `<link href="css/bootstrap.min.css" rel="stylesheet">`? Yeah, that's pointing to a file that doesn't exist. We don't have a `css` folder, do we! 

Well, we do, it's just not in the top level of our project. It's in `node_modules`, of course! That's where `npm install` put it. So we need to modify our file, adding `/node_modules/bootstrap/dist/` before the `css/bootstrap.min.css`: 

```html
<link href="/node_modules/bootstrap/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css" rel="stylesheet">
```

Now, refresh the page in Chrome (run `gulp serve` again if it's not already running). That font change you just saw? That means Bootstrap is working. 

Let's do a wee bit of layout work. Replace `<h1>Hello, world!</h1>` with this: 

```html
<div class="container">
  <h1>Yacintha's First Project</h1>
  <hr>
  <div class="main">
    <p>Hello, World!</p>
  </div>
</div>
```

(You can get more creative with that first line). 

Note that the `"container"` class is a bootstrap class. It's responsible for that padding you see. You can play around with some bootstrap by going to [their docs](http://getbootstrap.com/css/) and playing around here if you want. But for now, I'm going to presume some basic html/css/bootstrap competence and a desire to get cracking with "real code". If HTML and CSS are really new and scary to you, I recommend <<< THING TO RECOMMEND >>> 

The `class="main"` isn't a bootstrap thing. Right now, it's not doing anything. But we'll make use of that soon. 
