---
chapter: 4
title: "Hello, CoffeeScript"
layout: default

---

Finally, time to get a-movin' and a-shakin'. We're going to get ...

We're gonna start writing some CoffeeScript. 

Let's create `coffee/app.coffee`. (You may need to `mkdir ~/code/firstproject/coffee`). In Sublime Text, edit the file as such: 

```coffee
alert('Hello, World!')
```

Now go back to the browser and... nothing happened. Browsers don't run CoffeeScript, they run JavaScript. CoffeeScript is "A little language that compiles to JavaScript". Okay, so I guess that means we need to... compile it to JavaScript?

You got it! But we're not gonna do that the old-fashioned way (`coffee -cw`). Nah, we're gonna cook with gas! Err, with `gulp`, and a few of its friends. First, to install a few packages:

```sh
npm install --save-dev gulp-coffeeify gulp-coffeelint
```

And then to modify the `gulpfile.coffee`, adding: 

```coffee
# at the top
coffeeify = require "gulp-coffeeify"
coffeelint = require "gulp-coffeelint"

# at the bottom
gulp.task "coffee", ->
  gulp.src "coffee/app.coffee"
    .pipe coffeelint()
    .pipe coffeelint.reporter()
    .pipe coffeeify()
    .pipe gulp.dest('js')
```

Now, if we run `gulp coffee`, the `"coffee"` task will execute, linting our CoffeeScript code, compiling it to javascript, running it through browserify, and depositing the result into `js/app.js`. 

... Wait wait wait. What's "linting"? What's a "browserify"? Also, how come it stopped `serve`ing? 

"Linting" is something I didn't discover until I had been coding for a while, and I really wish someone had told me about it before. A linter checks your code for errors and bad style. I strongly recommend installing the SublimeLinter-coffeelint package if you haven't already (covered in "Installation Station"). But having `coffeelint.reporter()` in your gulpfile will give you a (hopefully) helpful message whenever there's an error in your code. 

[Browserify](http://browserify.org/) is another one of those things that I wish existed back when I got my stripes (waaaay back in 2011). Browserify lets you install npm packages... in your browser! (dah dah dah DAH!) Remember, Node.js is a *server* environment for JavaScript. It's not quite the same thing as the stuff in your Browser. For example, "Browser JavaScript" has a `window` object that refers to the browser (to oversimplify), and Node.js has an `http` module, among other things. 

Even more importantly, Node.js has modules in general. That is, you can import other files, other modules, other code, with the `require()` function. And thanks to `npm`, you can easily download and install modules worth `require()`ing. 

There are alternatives to Browserify like CommonJS and AMD and a bunch of others. <<< TODO: COVER ALTERNATIVES BETTER >>> 

In the dark ages before Browserify and co, you imported other code by putting multiple `<script>` files in your html, one after the other. In some ways, that was simpler, but it was less reliable, messy, and hard to keep track of. It was also bad for performance. Lumping all your JavaScript together into one file (which, later on, you'll minify and compress) is recommended for performance purposes by most pros. Just be aware that your "app.js" file is about to get big. 

We're calling Browserify indirectly, through the `coffeeify` package. Coffeeify compiles our Coffee to JS and then imports the modules through Browserify. 

As to that last question - how come gulp stopped `serve`ing? - well, first of all, how did you even notice! Probably by refreshing the browser window after every single little thing. How commendable! (I strongly recommend you do this in general, especially while you're learning). 

It truly would be a drag to have to run `gulp coffee` and then `gulp serve` every single time you make a change. We can fix that by adding a `"default"` task to gulp: 

```coffee
# at the bottom of gulpfile.coffee:
gulp.task "default", ["coffee", "serve"]
```

Now, you can just run `gulp` and it'll run the `"coffee"` task and then the `"serve"` task. 

One more thing. That `js/app.js` file that was generated? We need to insert it somewhere! Go to `index.html` and replace these four lines: 

```html
<!-- jQuery (necessary for Bootstrap's JavaScript plugins) -->
<script src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.11.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
<!-- Include all compiled plugins (below), or include individual files as needed -->
<script src="js/bootstrap.min.js"></script>
```

With this: 

```html
<script src="/js/app.js"></script>
```

(We don't need either jQuery or the Bootstrap JavaScript when we use React, as React somewhat miraculously cures the ills that jQuery seeks to solve and we'll later use the excellent `react-bootstrap` package in place of standard Bootstrap JS).

Go to your browser, refresh `http://localhost:8080`, and voila! An annoying popup bugs you with the message, "Hello, World!". How wonderful. 

Now let's change the code in `coffee/app.coffee` to instead read: 

```coffee
alert("whatsup homiez")
```

If we go back and refresh the browser, it still pops up with "Hello, World!". Bummer! That's because we need to compile CoffeeScript to JavaScript. What a pain, right? Wrong - we can just add another gulp task to take care of that for us! (I'm not too into pains). 

First, install `gulp-watch`: 

```sh
npm install --save-dev gulp-watch
```

Now, let's add it to `gulpfile.coffee`: 

```coffee
# at the top:
watch = require('gulp-watch')

# at the bottom, replacing the existing "default" task: 
gulp.task "watch", ->
  gulp.watch "coffee/**/*.coffee", ["coffee"]

gulp.task "default", ["coffee", "serve", "watch"]
```

What this will do is watching *everything* in the `coffee` folder (the `/**/` means look in the folder and its sub-folders) that ends with `.coffee`, and when it changes, run the `"coffee"` task again. (You don't have to watch any of the other files, like `index.html`, because they don't need to be recompiled; `ecstactic`, which does our static serving, always just reads the lastest version of the files).

Keep in mind that there might be a bit of a lag between you saving a file and the `coffee` task completing, so you may need to wait a second before refreshing. If you like, you can set up [livereload](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/livereload/jnihajbhpnppcggbcgedagnkighmdlei?hl=en) to refresh automatically as soon as the task has completed. 

To do this, install:

```sh
npm install --save-dev gulp-livereload
```

And in `gulpfile.coffee`:

```coffee
# at the top:
livereload = require "gulp-livereload"

# at the end of the "coffee" task:
  .pipe livereload()
```

Now, whenever you save a coffee file, it'll refresh the page in your browser after the new js is compiled! Note that you'll need to install the Chrome extension and turn it on by clicking the extension's icon.

Alrighty, let's get a little more coumfy here. After checking that it worked, delete that immature `alert("whattup homiez")` nonsense. What is this, a book for beginners??

Let's instead write some coffee. If the following looks confusing to you, you should consider spending a little more time familiarizing yourself with CoffeeScript, through one of the resources listed in the intro. In `app.coffee`: 

```coffee

for i in [0..10]
  console.log "Hello, for the #{i}th time!" 

```

And load that up in the browser. You'll need to open up the console to see what comes out of `console.log`: in Chrome, you can do that with `cmd+opt+j`. I won't tell you where to find it in the toolbar because you're gonna want to get used to keyboard shortcuts =)

In general, you'll want Chrome Developer Tools (which include "The Inspector" and "The Console") open at all times when developing. Using `console.log` to debug is a lot easier and less disruptive than using `alert`, which is just plain annoying. If you always have the Console up and running, you'll see both errors and debugging messages as soon as they come up. 

Final note: remember *not* to directly edit the `js/app.js` file! It'll just get deleted the next time you compile your coffeescript. This will make you confused and sad. Writing CoffeeScript will make you happy!
