---
chapter: 5
title: "Hello, React"
layout: default

---

Alright, uh. React.js time. 

## What is React.js, in 60 seconds or less?

React is a << INSERT THING FROM WEBSITE >>

For a long time, developers have been searching for something that would make it easy to turn the "static" HTML into something truly interactive. I think React is the first time they've really gotten that right. Other recent attempts include Angular.js and Ember.js, both of which are well-done and have a large number of adherents. Meteor.js is another interesting project. All are great, but I find React is by far the simplest: it just *doesn't hurt my brain*. Which is pretty incredible, coming from Angular. And even more incredible, coming from "spaghetti jQuery". 

React also claims to be the most "performant" (fast). There's always a debate about such things, but React is one case where opting for the "simplest" doesn't mean you're getting slower/worse. 

## What about JSX?

React has lots of great ideas. JSX is not one of them in my opinion. I find it mushes together two ugly languages (JavaScript and HTML) into something even uglier. (Again, personal opinion!)

However, we don't actually have to use JSX. And with some simple conventions, I've found that writing React code with CoffeeScript is an incredible joy. It's like the world's best templating language without even needing a templating language. We'll be writing our views in pure CoffeeScript. 

Again, keep in mind that not everyone does things this way. You'll see some JSX out there and you'll need to be able to read it. But I don't think you'll have too many troubles. 

## How does React work?

I'll show you!


```sh
npm install --save react
```

Time to get slightly more serious in `app.coffee`: 

```coffee
React = require "react"


HelloWorldComponent = React.createClass
  render: ->
    React.DOM.div {},
      'Hello, I come from React!'

React.renderComponent(
  HelloWorldComponent()
  document.querySelector('.main')
)

```

<<< IMAGE DIFFS OF NEXT FEW THINGS >>>
(one of which is `{div} = React.DOM` and the next is `h1` and `p` and then after that is attributes and then after that is `textDecoration`)

... just look aat the commits


```sh
npm install --save react-bootstrap
```

```sh
npm install --save-dev reactify 
```
